{
  "UPI":{
    "History":"It was introduced in 2016 by the National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI) – an entity created by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). UPI has helped universalize digital payments in India in a short time.",
    "What":"Unified Payment Interface (UPI) is a mobile-based payment system that enables real-time money transfer from your bank account to an individual, a merchant, or an online vendor.",
    "Advantages":"All you need to do is link your mobile phone with your bank account and Aadhar number. UPI has eliminated the need to run to an ATM, write a cheque, or log into the website of a bank to transfer or receive money.",
    "Howitworks":"To make a payment, the user needs to enter either the Virtual Payment Address or the Account number and IFSC Code or Aadhaar Number of the beneficiary or scan the QR code of the recipient on the UPI App. The user then enters Mobile PIN. The information is transmitted to NPCI, which in turn, sends it to the Issuer Bank for authentication. The Issuer Bank then authenticates the MPIN and debits the Remitter’s bank account and credits the Beneficiary’s bank account. All this happens in real-time.",
    "Easeofaccess":"Users can access UPI payment facilities through multiple means - UPI Apps (like BHIM) provided by Payment Service Players (PSP) like commercial banks, Payments Banks, and other third-party providers like Amazon Pay."
  },
  "RuPay":{
    "History":"RuPay was introduced in 2012 by the National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI) – an entity created by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Over 1100 public, private, regional rural and cooperative banks issue RuPay cards.",
    "What":"RuPay is the first Indian credit and debit card payment system. RuPay cards are accepted at ATMs, commercial establishments and e-commerce websites across India. Its name is derived from the words ‘Rupee’ and ‘Payment’, emphasising its Indian origin.",
    "Advantages":"RuPay cards offer multiple digital and contactless payment opportunities for consumers. There is faster authentication and transaction processing as well as a high level of data security. The transaction data does not have to go out of the country. For participating banks, the entry costs are low.",
    "Howitworks":"RuPay debit card, issued by banks, is a plastic card that can be used for withdrawing funds from an ATM, paying at shops and making online purchases. The RuPay credit cards work like any other credit card. Both RuPay debit and credit cards come with an embedded microchip for additional security against counterfeiting and duplication.",
    "Easeofaccess":"Both RuPay debit and RuPay credit cards are available in multiple variants – Classic, Platinum and Select. Special RuPay debit cards are issued for accessing government schemes such as RuPay Mudra, RuPay Kisan Card etc. RuPay prepaid cards are available for corporate gifting, salary disbursal etc."
  },
  "BHIM":{
    "History":"Bharat Interface for Money (BHIM) is a payment app that lets users make quick transactions using Unified Payments Interface (UPI). It has been developed by the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) and was launched in 2016 to boost financial inclusion.",
    "What":"Bharat Interface for Money (BHIM) is a payment application that allows users to make instant bank transfers using UPI. You can make 24X7 bank-to-bank payments instantly and receive funds using just your mobile number or Virtual Payment Address (UPI ID) or by scanning the QR code on the app.",
    "Advantages":"In addition to instant transfer and collection of money from any person using UPI, users can pay bills on merchant websites, book flight tickets or recharge mobile phones using BHIM. Funds can be transferred even to someone not using UPI, by inserting the bank account number and IFSC code of such recipients. Financial transactions carried over BHIM are free.",
    "Howitworks":"For transferring funds, one should enter the Virtual Payment Address of the Payee and the amount to be paid. This information along with your account and transaction details are securely sent from BHIM to its server, from where it is forwarded to the UPI interface at NPCI. From there, it is transmitted to the payee’s Payment Service Provider, which authenticates the details and responds to UPI. UPI confirms the same to your bank to debit the amount from your account. The bank responds to UPI after debiting and the information is transmitted back to BHIM and the payee’s bank. The beneficiary bank responds with a success to UPI after having credited the payee’s account.",
    "Easeofaccess":"BHIM is interconnected with every bank through the UPI ecosystem. It is available in 19 Indian languages - Hindi, Marathi, Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Oriya, Punjabi, Gujarati, Marwari, Haryanvi, Bhojpuri, Urdu, Konkani, Manipuri, Mizo, Khasi, Kannada, Bengali, Assamese – besides English. BHIM can work without the internet too using its offline features."
  },
  "NACH":{
    "History":"Before banks got connected to the internet, clearing of cheques used to take several days due to multiple electronic clearing systems of different banks. Responding to a felt need for an automated clearing house for high-volume and repetitive financial transactions, the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) introduced the National Automated Clearing House (NACH) in 2016.",
    "What":"NACH is a digital platform for high-volume interbank electronic transactions. Banks, financial institutions, corporates and the government are using NACH for making bulk transactions like the distribution of subsidies, dividends, interest, salary, pension etc. and for the collection of repetitive payments like utility bills and insurance premiums. NACH has harmonized and consolidated ECS or Electronic Clearing Service of different banks.",
    "Advantages":"NACH ensures instant, near real-time transaction processing across India compared to traditional processes. It does away the need for manual reconciliation, verification, and transmission of paper documents. Repetitive transactions can be instantly processed without the need for paper transmission across geographical distances. All this means less paperwork and eliminates manual handling of redo repetitive transactions.",
    "Howitworks":"In ECS, the mandate to debit funds from one’s account to pay a monthly instalment was physically exchanged between banks and it took up to 30 working days. With NACH, banks can send the mandate image along with data instead of the physical mandate. Customers can issue e-Mandate to authorise transactions by themselves. NACH acts as a mega clearing house connecting banks and customers on both ends through well-defined protocols and standards.",
    "Easeofaccess":"NACH’s Aadhaar Payment Bridge (APB) System helps government agencies implement the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) scheme by channelizing the government subsidies and benefits to the intended beneficiaries using the Aadhaar numbers. The System links government departments and their sponsor banks on one side and beneficiary banks and beneficiaries on the other hand."
  },
"IMPS":{
    "History":"The National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), an entity created by RBI, launched Immediate Payment Services (IMPS) in 2010. Till then, there was no provision for the transfer of funds 24x7x365 in real-time in India. Funds using the existing systems, Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) and National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT), could be transferred only during banking hours.",
    "What":"IMPS is an instant, 24X7, interbank electronic fund transfer service that could be accessed on multiple channels like mobile phones, Internet banking, ATM and SMS. IMPS allows transferring of funds instantly within banks across India which is safe and economical.",
    "Advantages":"IMPS can be used to transfer funds in multiple ways - person to person, person to account and person to merchant remittances – through mobile, internet and ATMs. Funds amounting up to Rs. 5 lakhs can be transferred daily, and the service can be availed beyond banking hours and on holidays too. IMPS can be used to receive foreign inward remittances.",
    "Howitworks":"For using IMPS on mobile or SMS or through the net banking portal, a customer should register for mobile/internet banking or SMS banking with an individual bank. For transferring or receiving funds using the mobile phone, the user should get the 7-digit Mobile Money Identifier (MMID). The combination of MMID and mobile number is uniquely linked with an account number, facilitating the money transfer.",
    "Easeofaccess":"For all bank account holders, IMPS has paved the way for the transfer of money through various channels and eliminates the need to go to a bank branch. There is no need to write a cheque or make a demand draft for paying someone. IMPS initiated a revolution in digital payments in India."
  },
"DigitialRupee":{
    "History":"Private virtual currencies - known as cryptocurrencies – are becoming popular but they are not commodities and have no intrinsic value. They are not regulated by any central bank. In light of technological changes, central banks are considering issuing Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDC). In December 2022, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) announced the launch of retail digital Rupee (e₹-R) on a trial basis.",
    "What":"RBI defines CBDC as the legal tender issued by a central bank in a digital form. It is akin to sovereign paper currency but takes a different form. It shall be exchangeable at par with the existing currency and shall be accepted as a medium of payment, legal tender and a safe store of value.",
    "Advantages":"IMPS can be used to transfer funds in multiple ways - person to person, person to account and person to merchant remittances – through mobile, internet and ATMs. Funds amounting up to Rs. 5 lakhs can be transferred daily, and the service can be availed beyond banking hours and on holidays too. IMPS can be used to receive foreign inward remittances.",
    "Howitworks":"The pilot project is to test the process of digital rupee creation, distribution and retail usage in real time. Eight banks have been identified for phase-wise participation in this project. It covers select locations in closed user groups (CUG) comprising participating customers and merchants. The e₹-R would be issued in the same denominations that paper currency and coins are currently issued. Different features and applications of the e₹-R token and architecture will be tested in future pilots.",
    "Easeofaccess":"CBDC is aimed at complementing, rather than replacing, physical money and is envisaged to provide an additional payment avenue to users. Supported by all the features of the current payment systems like safety and security, the Digital Rupee (e₹) system will boost India’s digital economy and make the monetary and payment systems more efficient."
  },
"PlasticMoney":{
    "History":"Plastic money refers to a form of payment that enables consumers to make transactions without spending cash. Cashless payments can be done by using credit and debit cards issued by different banks. These cards have been in vogue for a long time, but the use of plastic money in India became popular after the process of economic liberalization began in 1991.",
    "What":"The term ‘Plastic Money’ is normally used for debit and credit cards. A debit card enables an account holder to withdraw money from his account using the card at an ATM and pay at merchant points or buy things online. A credit card is used in the same way but the customer can pay to the bank later. It is a Buy Now, Pay Later or BNPL card. Both debit and credit cards carry logos of Visa or MasterCard along with the issuing bank’s name. Visa and MasterCard are payment systems that support banks around the world. RuPay is an Indian card system.",
    "Advantages":"Credit and debit cards offer a convenient way of executing electronic transactions in physical as well as online stores. However, they come with transaction fees charged by banks as well as fees and interest for providing credit. One of the major differences between a RuPay card and foreign cards (American Express,  MasterCard and Visa) is the operating cost. Since RuPay supports transactions within India only, merchants and banks pay less service charges compared to other cards.",
    "Howitworks":"When you swipe a credit card in a store, your card details are sent to the merchant’s bank. The bank gets authorization from the credit card network (Master, Visa, RuPay) to process the transaction. The card issuer then verifies the information and either approves or declines the transaction. If the transaction is approved, the payment is made to the merchant and your card’s available credit is reduced by the transaction amount. Debit cards function in the same way but the amount is debited straight away from the bank account.",
    "Easeofaccess":"The biggest advantage of using a credit card is the ease of use and safety. Issuing banks and merchants offer rewards or cash back which act as an incentive to use the card. On the flip side, credit cards come with high interest rates, which can be expensive if you don’t pay your balance in full monthly."
  },
  "CryptoCurrency":{
  "History":"The history of cryptocurrency dates back to the late 20th century, but the breakthrough came with the creation of Bitcoin in 2008 by an anonymous person or group using the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin introduced the concept of a decentralized digital currency, based on a technology called blockchain.Bitcoin gained attention in 2010 when it was used for the first recorded real-world transaction — the purchase of two pizzas for 10,000 BTC. After Bitcoin's success, other cryptocurrencies, often referred to as altcoins, started emerging. Litecoin, launched in 2011, was one of the earliest altcoins.In 2015; Ethereum was introduced, bringing the idea of "smart contracts" to the blockchain. This allowed for the creation of decentralized applications (DApps) beyond just digital currency.",

   "What":"Cryptocurrency is a type of digital or virtual currency that uses cryptography for security and operates on decentralized technology called blockchain. Unlike traditional currencies issued by governments (fiat currencies), cryptocurrencies are typically not controlled by any central authority, such as a central bank or government agency.
    Key characteristics of cryptocurrencies include:

    Decentralization: Cryptocurrencies operate on decentralized networks, typically using blockchain technology. This means that no single entity has
    full control over the currency, and transactions are verified by a distributed network of computers (nodes).

    Cryptography: Cryptocurrencies use cryptographic techniques to secure transactions and control the creation of new units. This makes them secure and resistant to counterfeiting.

    Peer-to-Peer Transactions: Cryptocurrency transactions are peer-to-peer, meaning they can be conducted directly between users without the need for intermediaries like banks. Transactions are typically irreversible once confirmed.

    Anonymity and Privacy: While transactions are recorded on the public blockchain, the identities of the participants involved are often pseudonymous. This provides a degree of privacy, although the level of anonymity can vary depending on the cryptocurrency.",

    "Advantages":"Cryptocurrencies offer several potential advantages, which have contributed to their growing popularity and adoption. Here are some of the key advantages of cryptocurrencies:
    Decentralization: Cryptocurrencies operate on decentralized networks, which mean they are not controlled by any central authority or government. This decentralization can enhance security, reduce the risk of manipulation, and provide more control to individual users.
    Fast and Low-Cost Transactions: Cryptocurrency transactions can be processed quickly, often within minutes, regardless of the sender's and receiver's geographical locations. Additionally, transaction fees are typically lower compared to traditional financial systems, especially for cross-border transactions.
    Ownership and Control: Cryptocurrency users have full ownership and control over their funds. This eliminates the need for intermediaries like banks, giving individuals more control over their financial assets.

    Privacy and Anonymity: While transactions are recorded on a public blockchain, the identities of the participants are often pseudonymous. This can provide a level of privacy for users who prefer not to disclose their personal information.

    Innovation and Development: The underlying technology of cryptocurrencies, blockchain, has inspired the development of various applications beyond just currency. Smart contracts, decentralized applications (DApps), and tokenization of assets are examples of innovations made possible by blockchain technology.

    Transparency: Transactions on a blockchain are publicly recorded, enhancing transparency and accountability. This transparency can discourage fraudulent activities and corruption.",

    "Disadvantage":"Price Volatility: Cryptocurrencies are known for their extreme price volatility. Prices can experience rapid and substantial fluctuations within short periods, which can lead to significant financial losses for investors and traders.
    Lack of Regulation and Legal Uncertainty: The regulatory landscape for cryptocurrencies is still evolving, and there can be legal uncertainty regarding their status and usage in different jurisdictions. Lack of clear regulations can lead to issues related to taxation, compliance, and consumer protection.

    Security Concerns: While cryptocurrencies use strong cryptographic techniques, the overall security of the ecosystem can be compromised. Cryptocurrency exchanges, wallets, and other platforms can be vulnerable to hacking attacks, resulting in the loss of funds.

    Irreversible Transactions: Cryptocurrency transactions are typically irreversible once confirmed on the blockchain. This means that if you send funds to the wrong address or fall victim to a scam, it's often challenging or impossible to recover your funds.

    Environmental Concerns: Some cryptocurrencies, particularly those that use Proof of Work (PoW) consensus mechanisms, require significant energy consumption for mining and transaction validation. This has raised concerns about their environmental impact.

    Complexity and Technical Barriers: Using cryptocurrencies can be complex and require technical knowledge. Individuals need to understand concepts like private keys, wallets, and blockchain technology to securely manage their funds.

    Lack of Privacy: While transactions are recorded on a public blockchain, the pseudonymous nature of transactions does not guarantee complete privacy. Analytical tools and techniques can potentially de-anonymize users' activities on the blockchain.

    Technology Risks: While blockchain technology is innovative, it's not immune to technical risks. Bugs, vulnerabilities, and software updates can impact the security and functionality of cryptocurrencies and their underlying platforms.

    So far, The Indian government and regulatory authorities have expressed concerns about the potential risks associated with cryptocurrencies, while also recognizing the potential benefits of block chain technology. In April 2018, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) imposed a banking ban that prevented banks from providing services to cryptocurrency businesses and traders. This led to a decrease in cryptocurrency trading activities. However, the Supreme Court of India lifted the banking ban in March 2020, stating that the RBI's decision was disproportionate. This ruling provided some relief to the cryptocurrency community.",
  },
}
